ready for review (#61)
rstudio/tensorflow-blog: _posts/2019-11-13-variational-convnet/variational_convnet.Rmd

---
title: "Variational convnets with tfprobability"
description: > 
 In a Bayesian neural network, layer weights are distributions, not tensors.
 Using tfprobability, the R wrapper to TensorFlow Probability, we can build regular Keras models that have probabilistic layers, and thus get uncertainty estimates "for free".
 In this post, we show how to define, train and obtain predictions from a probabilistic convolutional neural network.
 
author:
  - name: Sigrid Keydana
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: keydana2019variationalconv
bibliography: bibliography.bib
date: 11-13-2019
categories:
  - Probability and statistics
  - Time Series
  - Keras
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
preview: images/bbb.png
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

> A bit more than a year ago, in his beautiful [guest post](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2018-07-17-activity-detection/) Nick Strayer showed how to classify a set of everyday activities using smartphone-recorded gyroscope and accelerometer data. Accuracy was very good, but Nick went on to inspect classification results more closely. Were there activities more prone to misclassification than others? And how about those erroneous results: Did the network report them with equal, or less, confidence than those that were correct?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A bit more than a year ago, in his beautiful [guest post](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2018-07-17-activity-detection/), Nick Strayer showed how to classify a set of everyday activities using smartphone-recorded gyroscope and accelerometer data. Accuracy was very good, but Nick went on to inspect classification results more closely. Were there activities more prone to misclassification than others? And how about those erroneous results: Did the network report them with equal, or less confidence than those that were correct?
```

Reviewer: I added a comma to offset the "in...guest post", and removed the one between "less" and "confidence" in the last sentence. 
😠 Ugh, I hate when diffs don't work right!

> Technically, what we refer to when talking of _confidence_ in that manner is the _score_ obtained for the "winning" class after softmax activation ^[see [Winner takes all: A look at activations and cost functions](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2018-10-11-activations-intro/)]. If that winning score is 0.9, we might say "the network is sure that's a gentoo penguin"; if it's 0.2, we'd instead conclude "to the network, neither option seemed fitting, but cheetah looked best".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technically, what we speak of _confidence_ in that manner, we're referring to the _score_ obtained for the "winning" class after softmax activation ^[see [Winner takes all: A look at activations and cost functions](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2018-10-11-activations-intro/)]. If that winning score is 0.9, we might say "the network is sure that's a gentoo penguin"; if it's 0.2, we'd instead conclude "to the network, neither option seemed fitting, but cheetah looked best".
```

Reviewer: I played around a little with the wording in the first sentence above — feel free to take it or leave it as you like! (This is also one of those weird cases where "speak" sounds more natural to me than "talk," but I don't have a rationale).

Author: hey, thx! I think you mean "when we speak of", so I'll skip the autocommit and edit this manually

> This use of "confidence" is convincing, but it has nothing to do with confidence -- or credibility, or prediction, what have you -- intervals. What we'd really like to be able to do is put distributions over the network's weights and make it _Bayesian_. Using _tfprobability_'s variational Keras-compatible layers, this is something we actually can do.

Reviewer: > confidence -- or credibility, or prediction, what have you -- intervals.

The way this is now makes it sound like they're all different names for the same thing, is that what you're going for? (I genuinely don't know if that's the case in this context).

Author: hm, no... of course i don't want to give the impression like to me these are the same...
I'll think about it... on first thought i felt like removing, but "credibility" makes for a good link to "Bayesian"...

> [Adding uncertainty estimates to Keras models with tfprobability](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2019-06-05-uncertainty-estimates-tfprobability/) showed how to use a variational dense layer to obtain estimates of epistemic uncertainty. In this post, we modify the convnet used in Nick's post to be variational throughout. Before we start, let's quickly summarize the task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Adding uncertainty estimates to Keras models with tfprobability](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2019-06-05-uncertainty-estimates-tfprobability/) shows how to use a variational dense layer to obtain estimates of epistemic uncertainty. In this post, we modify the convnet used in Nick's post to be variational throughout. Before we start, let's quickly summarize the task.
```

Reviewer: Since the post is still there, it's still showing! 🙂

Author: lol!

## The task

> To create the [Smartphone-Based Recognition of Human Activities and Postural Transitions Data Set](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Smartphone-Based+Recognition+of+Human+Activities+and+Postural+Transitions) [@Reyes-Ortiz], the researchers had subjects walk, sit, stand, and transition from one of those activities to another. Meanwhile, two types of smartphone sensors were used to record motion data: _Accelerometers_ measure linear acceleration in three ^[or two, depending on the application] dimensions, while _gyroscopes_ are used to track angular velocity around the coordinate axes. Here are, from Nick's original post, the respective raw sensor data for six types of activities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create the [Smartphone-Based Recognition of Human Activities and Postural Transitions Data Set](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Smartphone-Based+Recognition+of+Human+Activities+and+Postural+Transitions) [@Reyes-Ortiz], the researchers had subjects walk, sit, stand, and transition from one of those activities to another. Meanwhile, two types of smartphone sensors were used to record motion data: _Accelerometers_ measure linear acceleration in three ^[or two, depending on the application] dimensions, while _gyroscopes_ are used to track angular velocity around the coordinate axes. Here are the respective raw sensor data for six types of activities from Nick's original post:
```

Reviewer: Switched the last sentence to have "from Nick's original post" at the end

Author: haha, the usual :-)

```{r}
trainData %>% glimpse()
```

```
Observations: 289
Variables: 6
$ experiment    <int> 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 2…
$ userId        <int> 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4, 5, 5, 7, 7, 9, 9, 10, 10, 11…
$ activity      <int> 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7…
$ data          <list> [<data.frame[160 x 6]>, <data.frame[206 x 6]>, <dat…
$ activityName  <fct> STAND_TO_SIT, STAND_TO_SIT, STAND_TO_SIT, STAND_TO_S…
$ observationId <int> 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 2…
```

```{r}
testData %>% glimpse()
```

```
Observations: 69
Variables: 6
$ experiment    <int> 11, 12, 15, 16, 32, 33, 42, 43, 52, 53, 56, 57, 11, …
$ userId        <int> 6, 6, 8, 8, 16, 16, 21, 21, 26, 26, 28, 28, 6, 6, 8,…
$ activity      <int> 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8…
$ data          <list> [<data.frame[185 x 6]>, <data.frame[151 x 6]>, <dat…
$ activityName  <fct> STAND_TO_SIT, STAND_TO_SIT, STAND_TO_SIT, STAND_TO_S…
$ observationId <int> 11, 12, 15, 16, 31, 32, 41, 42, 51, 52, 55, 56, 71, …
```

> The code required to arrive at this stage (copied from Nick's post) may be found in the appendix at the bottom of this page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code required to arrive at this stage may be found in the appendix at the bottom of this page.
```

Reviewer: I think that it's clear you're borrowing from Nick's post at this point!

## Training pipeline

The dataset in question is small enough to fit in memory -- but yours might not be, so it can't hurt to see some streaming in action. Besides, it's probably safe to say that with TensorFlow 2.0, [tfdatasets](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tools/tfdatasets/articles/introduction.html) pipelines are _the_ way to feed data to a model.

> Once the code listed in the appendix has run, the sensor data is to be found in `trainData$data`, a list column containing `data.frame`s where each row corresponds to a point in time and each column holds one of the measurements. However, not all time series (recordings) are of the same length; we thus follow the original post to pad all series to length `pad_size` (= 338). The expected shape of training batches will then be `(batch_size, pad_size, 6)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the code listed in the appendix has run, the sensor data can be found in `trainData$data`, a list column containing `data.frame`s where each row corresponds to a point in time and each column holds one of the measurements. However, not all time series (recordings) are of the same length; we thus follow the original post to pad all series to length `pad_size` (= 338). The expected shape of training batches will then be `(batch_size, pad_size, 6)`.
```

train_x <- train_data$data %>% 
  map(as.matrix) %>%
  pad_sequences(maxlen = pad_size, dtype = "float32") %>%
  tensor_slices_dataset() 

train_y <- train_data$activity %>% 
  one_hot_classes() %>% 
  tensor_slices_dataset()

train_dataset <- zip_datasets(train_x, train_y)
train_dataset
```

```
<ZipDataset shapes: ((338, 6), (6,)), types: (tf.float64, tf.float64)>
```

Then shuffle and batch it:

```{r}
n_train <- nrow(train_data)
# the highest possible batch size for this dataset
# chosen because it yielded the best performance
# alternatively, experiment with e.g. different learning rates, ...
batch_size <- n_train

train_dataset <- train_dataset %>% 
  dataset_shuffle(n_train) %>%
  dataset_batch(batch_size)
train_dataset
```

```
<BatchDataset shapes: ((None, 338, 6), (None, 6)), types: (tf.float64, tf.float64)>
```

Same for the test data.

```{r}
test_x <- test_data$data %>% 
  map(as.matrix) %>%
  pad_sequences(maxlen = pad_size, dtype = "float32") %>%
  tensor_slices_dataset() 

test_y <- test_data$activity %>% 
  one_hot_classes() %>% 
  tensor_slices_dataset()

n_test <- nrow(test_data)
test_dataset <- zip_datasets(test_x, test_y) %>%
  dataset_batch(n_test)

```

> Using `tfdatasets` does not mean we cannot run a quick sanity check on our data:

Reviewer: The double-negative above sounds a little off. Perhaps something ~ "We'll run a quick sanity check on our data (even though it's from `tfdatasets`)." or something of the like?

```{r}
first <- test_dataset %>% 
  reticulate::as_iterator() %>% 
  # get first batch (= whole test set, in our case)
  reticulate::iter_next() %>%
  # predictors only
  .[[1]] %>% 
  # first item in batch
  .[1,,]
first
```

```
tf.Tensor(
[[ 0.          0.          0.          0.          0.          0.        ]
 [ 0.          0.          0.          0.          0.          0.        ]
 [ 0.          0.          0.          0.          0.          0.        ]
 ...
 [ 1.00416672  0.2375      0.12916666 -0.40225476 -0.20463985 -0.14782938]
 [ 1.04166663  0.26944447  0.12777779 -0.26755899 -0.02779437 -0.1441642 ]
 [ 1.0250001   0.27083334  0.15277778 -0.19639318  0.35094208 -0.16249016]],
 shape=(338, 6), dtype=float64)
```

Now let's build the network.

## A variational convnet

> We build on the straightforward convolutional architecture from Nick's post, just making minor modifications to kernel sizes and numbers of filters. We also throw out all dropout layers; no additional regularization is needed on top of the priors applied to the weights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We build on the straightforward convolutional architecture from Nick's post, making minor modifications to kernel sizes and numbers of filters. We also throw out all dropout layers; no additional regularization is needed on top of the priors applied to the weights.
```

    kernel_size = 7, 
    activation = "relu",
    kernel_divergence_fn = kl_div
  ) %>%
  layer_global_average_pooling_1d() %>% 
  layer_dense_flipout(
    units = 48,
    activation = "relu",
    kernel_divergence_fn = kl_div
  ) %>% 
  layer_dense_flipout(
    num_classes, 
    kernel_divergence_fn = kl_div,
    name = "dense_output"
  ) %>%
  layer_one_hot_categorical(event_size = num_classes)
```

We tell the network to minimize the negative log likelihood.

```{r}
nll <- function(y, model) - (model %>% tfd_log_prob(y))
```

This will become part of the loss. The way we set up this example, this is not its most substantial part though. Here, what dominates the loss is the sum of the KL divergences, added (automatically) to `model$losses`.

In a setup like this, it's interesting to monitor both parts of the loss separately. We can do this by means of two metrics:

```{r}
# the KL part of the loss
kl_part <-  function(y_true, y_pred) {
    kl <- tf$reduce_sum(model$losses)
    kl
}

# the NLL part
nll_part <- function(y_true, y_pred) {
    cat_dist <- tfd_one_hot_categorical(logits = y_pred)
    nll <- - (cat_dist %>% tfd_log_prob(y_true) %>% tf$reduce_mean())
    nll
}
```

> We train somewhat longer than Nick did in the original post, allowing for early stopping though. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We train somewhat longer than Nick did in the original post, allowing for early stopping. 
```

```{r}
model %>% compile(
  optimizer = "rmsprop",
  loss = nll,
  metrics = c("accuracy", 
              custom_metric("kl_part", kl_part),
              custom_metric("nll_part", nll_part)),
  experimental_run_tf_function = FALSE
)

train_history <- model %>% fit(
  train_dataset,
  epochs = 1000,
  validation_data = test_dataset,
  callbacks = list(
    callback_early_stopping(patience = 10)
  )
)
```

> While the overall loss declines linearly (and probably would for many more epochs), this is not the case for classification accuracy and the NLL part of the loss:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the overall loss declines linearly (and probably would for many more epochs), this is not the case for classification accuracy or the NLL part of the loss:
```

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE, layout="l-body-outset", fig.cap = ""}
knitr::include_graphics("images/history.png")
```

Final accuracy is not as high as in the non-variational setup, though still not bad for a six-class problem. We see that without any additional regularization, there is very little overfitting to the training data.

Now how do we obtain predictions from this model?

## Probabilistic predictions

> Though we won't go into this here, it's good to know that we can't just access the output distributions; through their `kernel_posterior` attribute, we can access the hidden layers' posterior weight distributions as well. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though we won't go into this here, it's good to know that we access more than just the output distributions; through their `kernel_posterior` attribute, we can access the hidden layers' posterior weight distributions as well. 
```

Reviewer: ^^ Assuming that's what you mean (my original reading of it was you saying _We can't access the output distributions_, until I read the other part of the sentence)

Author: oh yeah... you always spot the weird-ish phrases ...

> Given the small size of the test set, we compute all predictions at once. The predictions now are categorical distributions, one for each sample in the batch: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the small size of the test set, we compute all predictions at once. The predictions are now categorical distributions, one for each sample in the batch: 
```

```{r}
test_data_all <- dataset_collect(test_dataset) %>% { .[[1]][[1]]}

one_shot_preds <- model(test_data_all) 

one_shot_preds
```

```
tfp.distributions.OneHotCategorical(
 "sequential_one_hot_categorical_OneHotCategorical_OneHotCategorical",
 batch_shape=[69], event_shape=[6], dtype=float32)
```

> We prefixed those predictions by `one_shot` to indicate their noisy nature: These are predictions obtained on a single pass through the network, all layer weights being sampled from their respective posteriors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We prefixed those predictions with `one_shot` to indicate their noisy nature: These are predictions obtained on a single pass through the network, all layer weights being sampled from their respective posteriors.
```

14    14   0.974     0.160         0.248  SIT_TO_STAND SIT_TO_STAND TRUE   
15    15   0.996     0.0657        0.0534 SIT_TO_STAND SIT_TO_STAND TRUE   
16    16   0.886     0.318         0.0868 SIT_TO_STAND SIT_TO_STAND TRUE   
17    17   0.773     0.419         0.173  SIT_TO_STAND SIT_TO_STAND TRUE   
18    18   0.998     0.0444        0.222  SIT_TO_STAND SIT_TO_STAND TRUE   
19    19   0.885     0.319         0.161  SIT_TO_STAND SIT_TO_STAND TRUE   
20    20   0.930     0.255         0.271  SIT_TO_STAND SIT_TO_STAND TRUE   
# … with 49 more rows
```

Are standard deviations higher for misclassifications?

```{r}
eval_table %>% 
  group_by(truth, predicted) %>% 
  summarise(avg_mean = mean(maxprob),
            avg_sd = mean(maxprob_sd),
            avg_mc_sd = mean(maxprob_mc_sd)) %>% 
  mutate(correct = truth == predicted) %>%
  arrange(avg_mc_sd) 
```

```
# A tibble: 2 x 5
  correct count avg_mean avg_sd avg_mc_sd
  <lgl>   <int>    <dbl>  <dbl>     <dbl>
1 FALSE      19    0.775  0.380     0.237
2 TRUE       50    0.879  0.264     0.183
```

They are; though perhaps not to the extent we might desire.

> With just six classes, we can as well inspect standard deviations on the individual prediction-target pairings level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With just six classes, we can also inspect standard deviations on the individual prediction-target pairings level.
```
